# Deep Learning techniques to improve theperformance of olive oil classification

One of the most important aspects for a quality olive oil assessment involves the use of a standardized sensory analysis according to the ‘panel test’ method . However, there is an important interest to show the potential of the use of the Gas Chromatography (GC) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) or ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) together with a chemometric data treatment for olive oil classification. It is an essential task in an attempt to get the most robust model over time and, both to avoid fraud in the price and to know whether it is suitable for consumption or not.

The olive oil samples were analyzed using the GC-IMS method which was fully described by the group of Arce et al. After trying several machine learning approaches to automatize the classification task, a deep neural network approach outperformed the others. In particular, the one used is a feed-forward artificial neural network  to learn a meaningful latent space. 

The dataset is built from the selection of specific olive oil markers obtained from the whole spectral fingerprint of the olive oils. The results show a good separation between classes: extra virgin olive oil (EVOO), virgin olive oil (VOO) and lampante olive oil (LOO). The results are based on accuracy and test/train validation in order to be comparable to previous results. Using harvest from 2014-2016, the model obtained 81.42% accuracy to classify in 3 classes EVOO, VOO and LOO. The accuracy obtained for 2 classes was 90% for EVOO/non-EVOO, and 95% for LOO/non-LOO. Using 2017-2018 harvest, the model obtained 78.18% accuracy to classify in 3 classes. The accuracy obtained for 2 classes was 82.72% for EVOO/non-EVOO, and 92.72% for LOO/non-LOO. The results obtained from 2014-2016 harvest overcome previous results based on Principal Component (PCA), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), k-nearest neighbors (KNN), and orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) \citep{Contreras2018}. 
